This economic system is utterly
mismanaging our planetary home.
We are destroying the life
supporting systems
of the only known
living planet in the universe.
So this system is not working
and we need to transform it
so that our economy enables us
to belong and thrive on planet earth.
“Change the system, not the climate”
is a common demand
in the climate movement.
But what does systemic change
actually mean?
How can we transform the dysfunctional
system that we have today
to one that can be of service
to both people and the planet?
Thank you!
We are going to meet economic thinkers
who try to find answers
to these questions.
I am an associate senior lecturer
in Human Ecology.
When you're an ecological economist,
you're trying to study the interaction
between the economy and nature.
We will explore new economic models
and theories:
Doughnut economics, degrowth,
economic democracy,
participatory economy
and the Not-for-Profit World.
You need to have the grassroots.
They represent the seeds
of a radically different economy.
BRAC is a development organization
that was founded in Bangladesh.
We will visit companies, grassroots organizations
and municipalities
that are trying to play their part
in this large transition.
Can we imagine alternative systems?
And if you can make people feel that they can
have an influence on a small scale,
then you can make people feel empowered.
Yes, new economic thinking.
Not just thinking, new economic doing.
Let's put this into practice.
The challenges humanity faces today
are immense and complex.
The effects of climate change and biodiversity
loss are getting more and more severe
and are already affecting
millions of people around the globe.
Traditional economic theories have treated
the environment as an externality,
something that is external to the price
agreement between consumer and producer,
and therefore
it has been left out of the calculation.
This means we find ourselves talking about
the ongoing death of much of the living world,
economists would say “yes, yes, that's
what we call an environmental externality.”
Well, I'm sorry if we're going to talk
about the death of the living world
as an environmental externality,
that is information enough to me
that this framework does not work
for our times.
The death of the living world
is not an externality.
It is the foundation of all life
on which everything depends,
including, of course,
the success of an economy.
So we need to overthrow that framing
and start somewhere else.
But where should we start?
What other frameworks are there?
A common misunderstanding is that there are only
two ways to organize an economy.
If you're against the system we have,
you’re a communist.
Which is like...
Choosing an economic system is not a multiple choice
questionnaire with two answers.
It's more like picking a movie on Netflix.
You know, you have everything available
and you could have like an infinity of other systems.
We just need to invent them.
So I think today what we need
is not one theory to rule them all
and just to replace mainstream economics.
We just need to realize that
this transition we're talking about
is so complex
that it will require
interdisciplinary thinking.
We can invent whatever economy we want.
Anything that has been socially
constructed,
can be socially deconstructed.
So if there are other ways,
how can we design a system that works
for both people and the environment?
One person who has given this
a lot of thought
is Kate Raworth, creator of Doughnut Economics.
So I worked for many years at the United Nations
and with Oxfam,
working on issues of human rights,
workers rights in global supply chains,
working on issues of protecting the environment,
stopping climate change.
And then one day I saw a diagram
which had been drawn up
by some earth system scientists, in fact
led by a Swedish scientist
who I know is very well
known, Johan Rockström.
And this diagram was a circle showing
that there were nine planetary boundaries,
nine life supporting systems
for planet earth that keep this
delicately balanced,
living planet in a stable state
that’s so benevolent to humanity,
but that we were already overshooting
multiple of these planetary boundaries.
A few examples of the planetary boundaries
are climate change,
freshwater use and ocean acidification.
Sitting at my desk in Oxfam,
I was struck by this diagram.
It hit me
that economics needs to be practiced
within that circle.
We need to create economies that work
within the planetary boundaries.
That seems so obvious.
But at the same time,
I was thinking, well,
if there's an outer limit of pressure that
human economies
should put on this planet,
for each person, there's also an inner
limit of resource use
that's required to meet our human rights.
And so inside their circle,
I drew a second circle
and it turned into a doughnut.
So put it in the simplest of terms,
here's the goal of the doughnut:
Leave no one falling short on the essentials of life
in the hole in the doughnut,
but don't overshoot
the life supporting systems
of this delicately balanced living planet.
And when we start there, with that
as our goal,
the shape of progress
is utterly transformed.
It's not never ending growth, it's
balance.
It's finding that balance
between the social foundation
and the ecological ceiling of the doughnut.
Thriving in balance,
that's where health lies.
And I believe this is the shape
of progress for the 21st century.
The challenge here is if this is progress
and the state of balance,
we are very far from that right now,
as all of the red
in this picture shows.
This, I call it the selfie of humanity
and our planetary home.
Billions of people in the world are
falling short on the essentials of life.
11% of people worldwide
don't have enough food to eat every day.
So this little red wedge goes 11%
of the way to the center of the circle.
We want to eliminate all of the red,
so that nobody is left
falling short on the essentials of life.
But we've got to do that while recognizing
that we've already overshot
multiple planetary boundaries.
Today, a worldwide movement has emerged,
where changemakers across the globe
come together
through the Doughnut Economics Action Lab,
turning the ideas of the doughnut into action.
Several cities in the world
have passed legislation to implement the model.
Amsterdam, Copenhagen and Melbourne
are a few examples.
We are going to visit
a newly started initiative
in a small town in the south of Sweden,
Tomelilla.
This is the first place in Sweden to work
with the doughnut model.
Our work with the doughnut model
started in relation to adopting a quality of life
program in the municipality
and that replaced environmental goals
and public health goals.
And then we had one complex area
with the environment
and then another complex area
with public health
and when you add two complex areas,
they don’t get simpler,
they get even more complex.
So we started to think about
how to handle this
and work with it in a
reasonable way
in a small municipality
with few resources.
Somehow you want to find a win-win
situation,
where you can combine agriculture and housing
without taking up too much land.
So one track that we are working on
is the physical infrastructure
and the community planning
and another track is about
citizen dialogue.
- And then we have Onslunda.
- Good!
-Not just Onslunda...
And then we discuss
what we have in Tomelilla today,
that can contribute to a better
quality of life
inside the limits of the doughnut.
And then we look at it on a
local and a global level,
looking at what exists now,
and what is missing in Tomelilla today.
And then we try to find
different initatives
that citizens can run
and that the municipality can support.
Look at your wildland next door.
What they mean is look around
Tomelilla and see what is...
What do we have here?
We have maybe forests,
I heard about wetlands or
maybe other types of...
By starting with the rights of every person
and the integrity of the living planet.
This just changes
the economic conversation.
Because the first question we ask is:
What kind of economy can we design,
that will actually
bring humanity into this space?
And it sets a completely different vision
for what success looks like.
Economy.
The word means household management.
To manage scarce resources.
But how well do we actually manage
our resources right now?
An economy, and that's in the word,
it's supposed to economize resources.
Now, I look like I'm saying something
that should be obvious to anyone.
But like,
if your economy does not economize resources,
then it's not working well.
What does that mean
to economize resources?
It means that year after year,
as we better organize together
to have this thing we call an economy,
we should be able to work less.
We should be able to safeguard
natural resources so we can have
national parks and beautiful forests
instead of having to cut them down.
So over years, we should see this economy
actually getting smaller,
because it's getting more efficient.
So we have to dedicate less
and less of our lives and natural resources
to that very, you know, material thing,
that is the economy,
which is just here to coordinate
the satisfaction of our needs.
It’s not like
the end purpose of civilization.
Who cares about the economy?
It should be something peripheral in social life.
The problem today is that
we've inverted this.
We've considered the economy
the pinnacle of human civilization,
and we tend to subordinate
the social, the cultural, the political,
and especially the ecological
to the economic.
In the mainstream debate,
a common position is to advocate
for so-called green growth.
Statistically, there is a tight bond
between economic growth
and increasing climate emissions.
Proponents of green growth believe
that it's possible to disconnect these two
so that the economy can keep growing,
while the emissions go down.
This is called decoupling.
When I was a kid,
I believed in the Loch Ness Monster.
I really liked this. It was a nice story, but...
At some point, growing up as an adult
and facing the lack of evidence concerning
the existence of the Loch Ness Monster,
I mean, I had to give it up.
I think green growth is precisely
the same.
It's a nice and appealing story
because it doesn't force you to
change anything to the system.
Just something, at some point
in the future
will happen,
that will just green the economy.
You will have just people,
profit, planet, everything,
triple bottom line, win, win, win.
You don't have to choose.
Everything is fine.
All scientific evidence
we have on decoupling,
and we're talking about around
900 empirical studies
since the emergence of the term
in the 1990s,
has shown us that this green growth
politicians and corporate leaders believe in
does not exist.
How do we build a sustainable society
without economic growth?
And that is a huge problem,
because we have gotten used to it.
Our structures, the pension system
and everything is built on that.
But at the same time we know that
it’s impossible in the long run.
Even reading the National
Encyclopedia,
it says; the gross domestic product,
GDP, that which measures economic growth,
is measured exponentially
and it’s impossible in the long run.
Well, then let’s take that
into account.
And considering the gap between, you know,
the gains we're having
and the gains scientists tell us
we should be having,
to limit global warming
to 1.5 degrees, for example,
that requires nothing less
than total systemic change.
Even when I was in the parliament,
in the sauna of the parliament,
when the male politicians sat there
all naked,
then everyone understood this.
Then they put on their suits
and ties,
and then suddenly they understood nothing
on the speaker’s podium.
But in reality,
everyone understands this.
You understand it.
But then they say:
We can't change it right now.
We'll do it later.
Degrowth is an idea that criticizes the current system’s
need for constant growth.
The degrowth movement is made up of
researchers and activists,
who advocate for societies that prioritize
social and ecological well-being
over corporate profits, overproduction
and excess consumption.
Timothée Parrique is an economist,
specialized in degrowth.
We need another economic system
and we need it to be way smaller.
So we need that process of degrowth
as a biophysical diet
applied to rich, high income,
large GDP economies,
so that they can reach a sustainable,
steady state,
where these economies could prosper
without growth.
It means that right now the goal
is to shrink the footprint,
to stabilize it to a sustainable level.
And then we'll be shifting to
a post-growth economy,
where actually production will fluctuate.
If there's a new need emerging
at some point, then we can produce more.
We can mobilize a bit more of our time
and resources to match that need.
But when that need is matched,
or if we find new technologies
to produce more efficiently,
then we can do what an economy is supposed
to do: economize resources.
And you know, we can have,
instead of a 40 hours workweek,
we can transition to a 30 hour workweek
and to a 20, into a 15...
And I call that economic progress.
An economist would be:
“Oh, my God, that's terrible.
That's unemployment.”
But from our community economics perspective,
we would see,
that time we managed to free,
means you can start a sports association.
You can teach badminton
to kids in your neighborhood.
You will be able to be more active in local politics,
which would enrich democracy.
You would like volunteer to different NGOs.
You would start to, you know, spend
more time with your neighbors,
which would increase trust systems
in a specific city.
You would do all these kinds of stuff,
that creates huge amount of value,
even though there's no money numbers on it.
So when I look at this,
I don't see like,
just all of a sudden, the economy stops.
No, the economy shifts.
We would shift from this pursuit of
abstract monetary values,
to the pursuit of concrete needs satisfaction.
So we would be forced to ask ourselves
the very deep question of political economy:
What do we want to produce? And how?
What do we value?
What do we really need?
Another important aspect
when talking about our economic system
is the question of democracy.
Who is actually governing the economy
today?
The thing that you become
very clear about
is that multinational corporations
control our global economic system
and are governing
our global economic system and
every government is just trying
to compete against one another
to attract or appease
these giants.
And so we have a system now
where nearly every sector in the world
is now controlled by less than a
handful of corporations.
So the bigger a company becomes,
the more profit it can get.
So there's a built-in incentive
for companies
to become quite large and powerful.
And there's also a built-in incentive
to use that wealth and power
to influence policy in order
to protect the profits of the company.
And we're seeing that as well
all over the world,
that companies are investing
in lobbying politicians
in order to get subsidies
or fight down regulations and taxes
that would take away from their profit.
And so we've got this state of what Oxfam
and others have called political capture.
And we have these global legal instruments,
I don't know if you're familiar with the ISDS,
the investor state dispute settlement system.
It sounds like it would be super boring.
And I think that's intentional,
because it is a clause that is written into hundreds,
like all of the trade agreements
and bilateral investment agreements
that allow for multinational corporations
to sue governments,
for the right to impose any policy
that might infringe on their profits.
Ecuador, for example, got sued
for the right to not drill in the Amazon,
and they had to pay the equivalent
of their entire health budget
for the right not to do that,
because they had signed on to these agreements.
And it makes you realize that we have this
global economic architecture
that is working in service
of multinational corporations,
that could be used to actually
hold them accountable,
but we’re not using it that way.
For me, that political capture
is something that's very prevalent
and very clear
and the sort of the limited policy space
that a lot of governments
even have for sort of economic
self-determination.
Let alone the people, and the communities
that are really trying to just have a
voice over their livelihoods.
The problem today is that
if you have companies that are ruled
very hierarchically,
where you have boards sending down
directives to managers,
who send down to middle managers
and further down,
and those at the bottom
have no possibility to influence upwards.
What kind of citizen does that create?
Is that a good school for democracy?
I think that it fosters a hierarchical thinking,
that then spills over on the bigger
political landscape,
contributing to what we call
“the threat to democracy”
or that democracy isn’t functioning
that well,
because people are not used to,
and are not allowed to take part
in decision-making
in their everyday life.
A recurring idea when talking to economic thinkers
about systemic change
is that the economy needs to become
more democratic.
Where and by whom should
decisions be made?
What resources should we use and for what?
Today these decisions are often made
in closed boardrooms of large companies,
with little to no possibility
for influence from the general public.
These decisions could instead
be made democratically,
by the people who are affected
by these decisions.
Economic democracy is a concept
that proposes to shift decision making power
from corporate managers and shareholders,
to a larger group
that includes workers, customers
and the broader public.
We're seeing the rise and return
of cooperatives,
of employee-owned companies,
who then have a lot of voice
in the governance,
in the decision making of the board.
To me, this is a really good example
of economic democracy
that can arise up from the systems
we've inherited,
but transforming how things are owned
and governed and financed,
brings back that democratic voice.
Economic democracy is a theoretical framework
with many different branches.
There are different ideas about the market
and what part of society
should be under democratic control and not.
A common denominator is that companies
should be governed by their employees.
We are going to visit
an employee-owned company
in Sweden, called Tjeders.
Since we are employee-owned,
the decision making processes
are a bit different
from traditional companies.
As soon as you are employed
at Tjeders,
you get co-determination rights,
since you become a part
of our foundation.
No one can own a stock in Tjeders
unless you are an employee,
or one of the external board members,
they also have the right to own stocks,
as long as they have the assignment.
In the last decades a whole field
of research has emerged,
where they look at how these companies
work in practice.
So not in theory,
but empirically.
One thing that has been observed is,
maybe contrary to common belief,
that they are actually more productive
than comparable conventional
companies.
That the employees are more motivated
and you don’t need as many
monitoring middle managers,
this has been observed.
Because the employees have a
direct incentive
to care about their own company.
In larger companies,
we can see economic democracy
beginning to come into play
of bringing the workers voice,
the union voice, into the board,
into governance, into decision making.
We can also bring in the voice of nature.
How can nature have a seat at the table?
How can future generations
have a seat at the table?
So that things are governed
not only for the short term interests
of the financial owners,
but for the long term interests
of society, of the workers,
of the living world.
There is a difference if a company
is owned by
people living nearby the company,
or if it’s owned by people living
5 000 km away
and sit on an island,
somewhere.
Because if it’s people living close by,
then maybe you think twice,
before polluting the local lake with toxins,
where you take your kids
to swim on the weekend.
We are not owned by a
venture capital company,
which might want to make money
for a while
and then shuts down or
moves abroad.
Here it’s us taking the decisions,
close to the costumers,
and close to the company.
I think that if we weren’t
in this position now,
then we would have been bought up,
and shut down.
Then the head office would not be
in Malmköping anymore,
I am pretty sure about this.
I think we would get better companies,
more long-sighted companies,
not just looking at the next quarter.
With lower wage differences
between bosses and workers.
In Mondragon,
the CEO is not allowed to make more
than 6 times more
than the lowest earning person.
And today in Sweden,
in the big companies,
a CEO makes about 60 times more
than an industry worker.
And then of course the dividends
of these companies
wouldn’t disappear away to
other countries,
but it would stay in the local area,
and be dispersed pretty evenly
among the people working close
to the company.
And the companies would become
more locally oriented.
They would grow roots,
where they are.
One branch of economic democracy
that goes further than the others,
is called participatory economy.
It proposes to replace the market
with a participatory, decentralized
planning process.
Participatory economy is unusual
as an alternative
to capitalism and central planning,
precisely because it does try to
propose a third way
between markets and central planning
to get the business of economics done.
Reconciling supply and demand
in a different, participatory way
that puts workers,
as both producers and consumers,
front and center in the decision making process.
There is a need in any economy
to balance aggregate supply and demand,
to figure out what goods
need to be produced
and where they need to get to.
In a participatory economy,
there would be a recurring
planning procedure.
Such a procedure is coordinated by
consumer councils
that express what is needed
and worker councils that propose
what they can produce.
This information,
what they want to produce and consume,
is then compiled by a facilitation group
and the prices of products are calculated
and sent back to the councils,
who then revise their suggestions.
This process is repeated over
several rounds
until a plan is attained.
It's producing data
based on what people say they want to do
and what they want to consume
and it’s producing the data
in a format
that allows workers
to see the big picture, right,
to allow them
to make an informed decision.
What we have managed to do
is to figure out
how could this process,
of workplaces proposing
what they want to do,
neighborhoods proposing
what they want to consume,
how could this process arrive at
a feasible plan,
where everybody could finally do
what their final proposal says?
And under what conditions
would that feasible plan be efficient?
Would it use the scarce, productive
resources in the economy efficiently?
So you need a mechanism
that is going to adjust pricing,
which is basically just a quantified way of
attaching social and labor costs
to things
and ecological costs to things.
So you need a way to do that,
that's not relying on markets,
because markets systematically
misvalue crucial prices.
And so a participatory planning mechanism
is designed to reconcile
these kinds of things in a way that
values people's actual interests
and needs and desires,
instead of maximizing the profits
of an owning class or shareholders.
It allows people to participate
in the way that makes sense to them.
They're making decisions
about what affects them the most,
what goes on in their workplace,
what goes on in their neighborhoods.
And that's an important thing
because for us,
economic self-management
is having input
or decision making power
about decisions to the degree
you're affected by those decisions.
Some decisions affect us all,
but a lot of decisions affect
some people a lot more than others.
And that's the trick.
How do you actually manage
to at least approximate
decision making input in accord
with how much people are affected?
So that was part of the motivation
for proposing the planning work
the way that we proposed.
We were also taking into account,
workers have been discouraged
from time immemorial.
Not just in capitalism. In feudalism
and slave systems...
People have lived, you know,
in complex human societies for eons now.
And we wanted to take that
historic legacy into account
when designing our proposal
for how things would be done.
To make it painfully obvious,
this is really different.
Another aspect that is key
when redesigning a system
is equality.
One thing that we need to bear in mind
is that in this globalized world,
we have these deep and embedded
structures of inequality
that come about from historical processes
such as colonialism,
but are continued and perpetuated today
through the very economic system
that we have.
There's a recent Oxfam report that came out
that shows that
ten men, ten billionaires, doubled their wealth
during the pandemic
while 99% of humanity
was left worse off.
And this is also showing that this is not:
“Oh, we're all growing
and some people are accumulating more.”
It’s like, no, some people are making more
at the expense of everyone else.
They have yachts and private jets
and several homes
and even private islands.
While we have, I think the last time
I looked at the statistics,
it was 800 million people who aren't
even having their basic nutritional needs met.
We constantly hear that we don't have enough food
to feed the world's population.
But the reality is
we do actually have enough food.
It's a lot about how is that food distributed,
how much that food costs,
what food we choose to eat and where
and those issues we need to tackle first.
And then actually
we might have more than enough food
for everyone who exists in this world.
So why do we have such inequality
in the world now?
According to one theory,
a force that is driving inequality
is the profit motive,
which is the ruling principle of companies
and other financial institutions today.
The Not-for-Profit World proposes
to remove the profit motive and replace it
with a social benefit purpose.
Jennifer Hinton is one of the creators
of the model.
The model I've been working on
for the past ten years or so,
we call it the Not-for-Profit World model,
and it's basically a model of a
not-for-profit market economy.
So in the for-profit way
of organizing the economy,
the purpose of economic institutions
like businesses and banks
and financial institutions,
is to enrich their owners,
to seek financial gain
for private investors and owners.
And so that's one of the key purposes
embedded in these institutions.
A not-for-profit market economy,
on the other hand,
would have the key purpose
of social benefit.
Of meeting people's needs
and even meeting environmental needs.
And so that difference in purpose
really changes the structure
of the economy
and accordingly the outcomes
and the consequences of the economy.
It would be a market,
that is selling goods and services
to meet people's needs,
but again, needs can be fulfilled.
So there's this ethic of enough.
There's a constant sort of monitoring
of the needs and challenges in the community
and whether people have enough or not.
So once we have enough,
maybe we don't have to produce more
goods and services,
maybe we don't have to sell more stuff.
We can sort of have this
steady state economy,
or even a shrinking economy
if we've sort of gone too far.
The Not-for-Profit World is based on
existing types of businesses,
not-for-profit companies,
sometimes called social enterprises.
These companies have a social benefit purpose
as their driving force
and all of the surplus goes
towards this mission.
We're going to visit BRAC,
one of the largest NGOs in the world.
BRAC owns several social enterprises.
Some of the things that they
produce and sell are
artisanal clothes, dairy products
and seeds.
BRAC is a development organization
that was founded in Bangladesh,
but we now work in about 14 countries
outside of Bangladesh as well.
The way BRAC, we look at social enterprises,
first of all,
it has to solve a social problem.
It's there to make social impact.
Our social enterprises make surpluses
and we reinvest 50% in the growth
of the social enterprise itself.
So we retain 50%
and we give 50% to BRAC.
And BRAC then uses it
for its development programs
or to pilot it or innovate a new idea.
So it spends the money
in its development programs.
So we are not here to sort of
sell products, make money,
and therefore produce where it makes sense
or where it makes
the most financial benefit
or sell things
that have the highest margin.
We take these decisions based on
who we are trying to support.
Over 65,000 artisans are dependent
for their livelihood on our own
and all of our decisions, we have to navigate
so that their interests
and what we really want to do, our mission
is always intact.
People, often coming from the private sector,
when they come and work in social enterprises,
something changes within them.
And people who are sort of arguing
with me, you know,
when they first joined about,
you know, okay, why don't we do this?
You know, why don't we import
milk powder and sell more?
Because, you know, instead of... you know,
because milk is cheaper now
in the global market,
it’s cheaper than collecting
from the smallholder farmer.
And then now the same person
is talking about how,
we need to sort of, you know,
build our,
collect from more smallholder farmers,
go to more remote areas,
a complete change in sort of the person's
thinking and understanding
and therefore action and decision.
And it's it's absolutely
fascinating to see.
We would have much more equality
in a not-for-profit type of economy
because we wouldn't have private owners
accumulating wealth from businesses
and we wouldn't have the built-in
incentive to keep wages low.
There wouldn't be a built-in incentive
to expand consumption and production constantly
to deliver profit to owners.
So it would align much better
with redistributional taxes
and environmental protection regulations
and regulations to protect workers,
for instance.
So it could actually serve to solve
a lot of the problems that we're facing today
in a very systemic way
by changing the goal and structure
of the economy.
In a Not-for-Profit World,
there would still be a market,
but it would play a smaller part
in society.
The size of the market would be determined
by how to best meet everyone's needs
within ecological limits.
Unlike now, enterprises would not feel
an inherent pressure to grow.
It’s not always easy to approach
the large and complex topic of economics.
How can we make it more accessible?
One of the biggest challenges with
changing the economic system
is that people feel powerless.
And they think that it’s very complicated,
that you need specific expertise or
a university degree or something,
which I think is not correct,
because economics is really about
resource management.
And who are more adept to
managing resources
than the people who are close to the resources
and are active at the location.
And that's why for me,
a lot of my passion is around trying to
demystify the economy
and really making it clear
that, like we are the economy,
you have a right and a responsibility
to have an opinion on it. Right.
And you should be engaged
in these sort of decision making processes,
because so often it's it's riddled
with a lot of jargon
and a lot of really complex ideas
that can feel really intimidating
and therefore,
as if it's beyond the scope of influence.
We have looked at different
economic models and concepts.
The Not-for-Profit World, economic democracy,
doughnut economics,
degrowth, participatory economy.
All of these models have a lot in common,
but they also differ in some aspects
and they are not the only ones.
There are a myriad of examples
popping up everywhere right now.
Collaborative economy,
solidarity economy, regenerative economy,
community wealth building,
positive money,
economy for the common good.
One organization that has tried
to gather many different perspectives
and ideas under one umbrella
is the Wellbeing Economy Alliance.
The Wellbeing Economy Alliance, or WEAll,
started about four years ago now
and it was originally a group
of a lot of like new economic thinkers
that were working in doughnut economics
or regenerative economy
or circular economy, degrowth, post growth,
like a lot of these different
conceptual ideas,
and who recognized that there was more
that unites us than divides us,
but that if we're really going to
build this alternative paradigm
and mainstream it,
then it's really important
that there's more collaboration.
The thing that unites us is a recognition
that we have to stop
treating people and planet
like they're here to serve the economy
and start treating the economy
like it's here to serve us.
And so that sort of shift,
just in terms of our understanding
of the economy, is what connects us.
Even if there are a lot of different
strategies and approaches
for getting there,
we feel like they all hold a piece of that puzzle,
of that different sort of economic system.
The Wellbeing Economy Alliance is
a global network
with 19 hubs spread over the world.
Susan Joy leads the East African hub.
One of the issues they are tackling is landgrabbing,
a problem many smallholder farmers
face all over the world.
Large corporations come
and take control over their land,
often through the use of corruption or force.
So with all this land grab,
it has become completely extremely hard
for farmers to survive.
And most of these farmers are poor.
They are poor farmers.
It’s very few smallholder farmers who
can actually support, feed their families.
You find the farmer that has
roughly three acres of land,
but this farmer is eating one meal a day.
The climate has changed.
Things are not how they should to be.
There is longer drought,
there is pests and diseases.
There's all these factors that come in
on top of that, plus also the land grab.
We are working with activist groups
and organizations that
are doing a lot of work around land,
For example Solidarity Uganda,
they do a lot of work with communities
that are facing landgrabbing
in various parts of the country.
And at the same time there are lawyers
that have also been able to support
these communities as well,
to offer pro-bono work,
so that these communities are able
to protect their land as well.
It really is about building economies
that are locally rooted
and are a reflection of our unique cultures
and contexts, geographies and histories,
and also that is molded
and directed by our voices
and by our active participation,
whilst being connected globally
and recognizing that we are also,
you know,
one species on a shared planet.
The science is clear.
Continuing with business as usual
is no longer an option.
We need alternatives.
In different parts of the world,
changes are already in motion.
But we still have a long way to go
before we reach
a truly sustainable economy.
What is needed now?
Where do we go from here?
When I say I think economic systems
need to be transformed,
I'm not saying
scrap everything we have and start again.
We can't do that.
Because we need to eat every day.
We need energy and travel and connection
every day.
We need to transform these systems
by working with them,
transforming them deep within.
And I think we need to go for the deep design
of the systems we've inherited.
Let's redesign the future of business
by redesigning the deep design
of companies in the world.
That will take us a long way
to the future we need
and while we’re there,
we need to redesign the regulatory
environment in which business happens.
So we need governments to incentivize
and encourage and enable companies
to be purpose driven.
We need governments to make it possible
for them to be incorporated in ways that
are owned far more socially
and community like a co-operative
or an employee-owned company
or a socially purposed enterprise.
We need finance that is not there
to serve itself,
but it's there to serve the real economy.
So reinventing the finance
of the future is key
to making it possible for business
to help bring humanity into the doughnut.
There are a lot of social entrepreneurs
that would like to start not-for-profit
types of businesses,
but they're not sure
if they can or how they can.
So we can support them by identifying them,
mapping out the not-for-profit businesses
in our communities,
shifting our consumption
to support them wherever we can.
And, you know, working for them,
maybe even volunteering with them
and raising awareness about them.
A new sustainable economic system
is not something that will be
built from above,
it’s not the United Nations who will
create this for us.
But if we want a sustainable
economic system
I think there will have to
be a social movement
with lots of different initatives, cities, activities
who create this sustainable relationship economy
in one place after another
and that is what will build a
new system.
I mean, I think it's always going to be
a multi level process. Right?
And so you need to have the grassroots movement
and examples and local transformations.
But I do think that
there is a very real constraint
to how much any local community
or national like entity
can really meaningfully transform the economy,
because we're so globally interconnected. Right?
And all of our production systems
and consumption systems
are really interwoven
with one another in a way
that requires a certain level
of global economic reform,
even to just make space
for self-determination.
So for some people,
it's about doing the care work,
doing the emotional labor
of taking care of our family and friends,
of building community together,
that is having agency.
For others it might be through art,
the art that they create,
which can give us
a sense of other futures,
that can be really important.
And for some it is about
doing the hard work
of protesting or writing policy
or building houses, whatever it is.
Find the different ways,
but understanding that
our impact is through what we do
as a collective.
Step one is just talking about the economy,
right?
And demystifying the economy,
encouraging people
to feel like they have...
their lived experience,
their common sense has a place
in this sphere and in these discussions,
because I feel like that's step one
and then expand it.
Once you have opened people's minds
to really even consider
what the economy is or can be,
then you can really start to advocate
for a different vision for it.
And we should spread the information,
raise awareness, have these discussions,
create social momentum,
because the more social momentum
we have,
the more we can pressure
economic actors and policymakers
to move in the direction
that we need them to.
These practices that are today a minority,
they are happening
in the cracks of capitalism.
They represent the seeds
of a radically different economy.
What we need today is to give them
space and resource and to water them
so that they can become the main way
of organizing an economy.
Yes, new economic thinking,
not just thinking, new economic doing.
Let's put this into practice.
But let's get started
where we can get started.
And I think we can get started at every level,
right from my own personal life,
from my household to my street,
to my town and my city
and my region and my nation and the world.
We need change to be happening
at every one of those places.